diagnostics-ideas.md, before:

Diagnostics:

  - **X is the target value**
  - **K is the number of org internal values**
  - Exploitation Diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - This will allow us to see if selection schemes can reach the target objective, even though there are multiple ways to get there.
      - Orgs will try to exploit a specific internal value.
    - Literature:
      - Exploration and Exploitation in Evolutionary Algorithms: A Survey
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles.
      - K internal values (vector of k values).
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific K value.
    - Problem:
      - The environment is represented as K targets, each target _i_ corresponding to
        position _i_ in organism genomes.
      - Goal: to maximize fitness, each position in a genome should be as close
        as possible to the associated target _i_.
      - fitness(org) = |X - vi|, where vi is the internal value at position i.
    - Analysis:
      - How close to X can orgs get?
      - Could add neutral space around targets?
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree
      - Solution count
        - A solution is an org that has at least 1 internal value that has reached X
    - Extension:
      - K numbers, all K internal values need to be X
      - As there are more and more numbers do you lose precision?
      - Add neutral space around targets

  - Structured Exploitation Diagnostic - Structured K Values
    - Purpose:
      - Some problems are structured in such a way where they require approach
        building block when trying to reach a solution.
      - This provides more of a relationship between the orgs internal values.
    - Literature:
      - Exploration and Exploitation in Evolutionary Algorithms: A Survey
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles.
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
    - Problem:
      - The environment is represented as K targets, each target _i_ corresponding to
        position _i_ in organism genomes.
      - Evaluation:
        - Starting from the beginning of an organism's genome, the subsequent value
          is evaluated only if it is greater than or equal to the first value.
      - Evolution should optimize the first value, then the second, then third,
        _etc._
      - fitness(org) = |X - v1| + ... + |X - Vj|
        - v1 <= ... <= vj
    - Analysis:
      - See how long the streak of successful internal values grows
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree
      - Solution count

  - Ecology Diagnostic - Contradictory K Values
    - Purpose:
      - If any individual organism can only be selected for one of the K values,
        how many distinct niches can be filled at any point in time?
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles.
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
    - Problem:
      - Fitness contribution for each trait: fitness(org, K) = vk- max(vi)
        - where vi is all other traits and i != k
    - Analysis:
      - Solution count
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Ecology Diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - **default** ecology diagnostic
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles.
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific K value
    - Problem:
      - Same as harsh ecology diagnostic above, but no trait can take on a score
        below zero.
        - i.e., organisms only receive fitness from their maximum trait value; all
          other traits are given a score of zero (instead of a negative value)
    - Analysis:
      - Solution count
        - **What does a solution look like?**
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Specialist Diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - How does the proposed selection scheme deal with specialist preservation?
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles (each double representing a trait).
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - One of the K internal values is a specialist trait (vk)
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
    - Problem:
      - Variant on the ecology diagnostic.
      - Score on non-specialist traits is value in trait minus the score in the
        specialist trait.
      - Score on specialist trait is just how close it is to the target for that
        trait position.
    - Analysis:
      - Solution count
        - **What does a solution look like?**
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Bad Hints Diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - When dealing with a huge testing space, it can be difficult to know if all test cases are correct.
      - How does a selection scheme contend with this challenge.
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - Emily's box problem? (POSSIBLY)
      - An organism should be be trying to get all of its K internal values to some target
      - Good hint objective:
        - Take internal value that minimizes, min(|X-v|)
      - Bad hint objective:
        - If objective is below 99, give score = 0
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a single good hint vs single bad hint change outcomes?
      - Solution count
        - All internal values have reached X.
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Bias diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - When dealing with a huge testing space, it can be difficult to know what test cases are redundant.
      - How does a selection scheme contend with this challenge.
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - User gives us *n*, which stands for the number of times we add the same test case to the test set.
      - We randomly select a test case and add it *n* times to the test set
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a biasing change outcomes?
      - Solution count
        - All internal values reach X
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Deceptive landscape
    - Purpose:
      - When dealing with certain problems, the landscape may be deceptive to an organisms exploration.
      - How does a selection scheme contend with this challenge.
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values).
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - Given K and X beforehand, can organisms' reach X for all K internal values
      - Fitness(org, X, vi) = tens place - ones place
      - Ex, Fitness(org, X, vi) -> vi = 78 -> 70 - 8 = 62 = Fitness(org, X, vi) = 62
      - If an organism's internal value goes over 100, will do the same process as above
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a deceptive landscape affect solutions attempting to reach objective
      - Solution count
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree
      - Exploitation + sawtooth effect

  - Overfitting diagnostic - Noise
    - Purpose:
      - When dealing with data, there may be noise associated with it
      - How does a selection scheme contend with this challenge
    - Literature:
      - Genetic Algorithms, Tournament Selection, and the Effects of Noise
      - Ton of ML literature on this subject
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - Each internal value will have 5 numbers associated with it
      - These 5 values are generated from N(X,sig) or a Normal Distribution
      - When picking a test case to evaluate organisms on, one of the random 5 numbers will be selected as well
    - Analysis:
      - How much does noise affect solutions attempting to reach objective?
      - Solution count
        - All internal values reach X
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Overfitting diagnostic - Smoothness
    - Purpose:
      - Please help...
    - Literature:
      - Ton of ML literature on this subject
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - We will define a function before hand, f(x) = x^2 for example
      - Each internal value has a unique value associated with it
      - [v1=1, v2=2, ..., vk=k]
      - f(v1) = f(1) = 1, f(v2) = f(2) = 4, ..., f(k) = f(k) = k^2
      - fitness(org) = sum(f(vi) - g(vi)), for all internal values where f is the ground truth and g is the solution's response
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a multiobjective problem affect solutions attempting to reach objective.
      - Solution count
        - All internal values must match the ground truth
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Exploration diagnostic
    - Only the highest trait counts & sequentially from there, going forward any traits that are lower than it
    - Purpose:
      - If there are many good places to go from here, can I find the right path?
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - fitness(org, K, X) = |X - vi| + ... + |X - vk|
        - vi is the internal value that minimizes |X - v|
      - We then sum all internal values to the right
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a problem structure affect solutions attempting to reach objective.
      - Solution count
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree
    - Expectation:
      - Age based selection schemes do well here

  - Pareto front diagnostic **MAYBE**
    - explicit trade-offs
    - overall target, every time there's a mutation => equal and opposite mutation on another trait
    - how many combinations can the selection scheme look at?
    - lots possible!

Commit message:

edits to bad hints descriptions

diagnostics-ideas.md, after:

Diagnostics:

  - **X is the target value**
  - **K is the number of org internal values**
  - Exploitation Diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - This will allow us to see if selection schemes can reach the target objective, even though there are multiple ways to get there.
      - Orgs will try to exploit a specific internal value.
    - Literature:
      - Exploration and Exploitation in Evolutionary Algorithms: A Survey
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles.
      - K internal values (vector of k values).
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific K value.
    - Problem:
      - The environment is represented as K targets, each target _i_ corresponding to
        position _i_ in organism genomes.
      - Goal: to maximize fitness, each position in a genome should be as close
        as possible to the associated target _i_.
      - fitness(org) = |X - vi|, where vi is the internal value at position i.
    - Analysis:
      - How close to X can orgs get?
      - Could add neutral space around targets?
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree
      - Solution count
        - A solution is an org that has at least 1 internal value that has reached X
    - Extension:
      - K numbers, all K internal values need to be X
      - As there are more and more numbers do you lose precision?
      - Add neutral space around targets

  - Structured Exploitation Diagnostic - Structured K Values
    - Purpose:
      - Some problems are structured in such a way where they require approach
        building block when trying to reach a solution.
      - This provides more of a relationship between the orgs internal values.
    - Literature:
      - Exploration and Exploitation in Evolutionary Algorithms: A Survey
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles.
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
    - Problem:
      - The environment is represented as K targets, each target _i_ corresponding to
        position _i_ in organism genomes.
      - Evaluation:
        - Starting from the beginning of an organism's genome, the subsequent value
          is evaluated only if it is greater than or equal to the first value.
      - Evolution should optimize the first value, then the second, then third,
        _etc._
      - fitness(org) = |X - v1| + ... + |X - Vj|
        - v1 <= ... <= vj
    - Analysis:
      - See how long the streak of successful internal values grows
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree
      - Solution count

  - Ecology Diagnostic - Contradictory K Values
    - Purpose:
      - If any individual organism can only be selected for one of the K values,
        how many distinct niches can be filled at any point in time?
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles.
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
    - Problem:
      - Fitness contribution for each trait: fitness(org, K) = vk- max(vi)
        - where vi is all other traits and i != k
    - Analysis:
      - Solution count
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Ecology Diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - **default** ecology diagnostic
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles.
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific K value
    - Problem:
      - Same as harsh ecology diagnostic above, but no trait can take on a score
        below zero.
        - i.e., organisms only receive fitness from their maximum trait value; all
          other traits are given a score of zero (instead of a negative value)
    - Analysis:
      - Solution count
        - **What does a solution look like?**
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Specialist Diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - How does the proposed selection scheme deal with specialist preservation?
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles (each double representing a trait).
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - One of the K internal values is a specialist trait (vk)
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
    - Problem:
      - Variant on the ecology diagnostic.
      - Score on non-specialist traits is value in trait minus the score in the
        specialist trait.
      - Score on specialist trait is just how close it is to the target for that
        trait position.
    - Analysis:
      - Solution count
        - **What does a solution look like?**
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Bad Hints Diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - When dealing with a huge testing space, it can be difficult to know if all test cases are correct.
      - How does a selection scheme contend with this challenge.
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
      - Emily's GPTP paper looking at Eco-EA, lexicase, etc selection schemes in
        context of bad hints.
    - ORG Structure:
      - Organisms are length-K vectors of doubles (each double representing a trait).
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
    - Problem:
      - Extension of exploitation diagnostic.
      - An organism should be be trying to get each of its K internal values to
        a target.
      - We will add hints (good, bad, or neutral) to our fitness evaluation.
      - Good hints:
        - Aggregate fitness (sum of fitness scores across all traits) as a 'hint'
          trait.
      - Bad hints:
        - 'hint' trait: Sum of error across all traits. Maximizing this contradicts
          global fitness maximum.
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a single good hint vs single bad hint change outcomes?
      - Solution count
        - All internal values have reached X.
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Bias diagnostic
    - Purpose:
      - When dealing with a huge testing space, it can be difficult to know what test cases are redundant.
      - How does a selection scheme contend with this challenge.
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - User gives us *n*, which stands for the number of times we add the same test case to the test set.
      - We randomly select a test case and add it *n* times to the test set
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a biasing change outcomes?
      - Solution count
        - All internal values reach X
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Deceptive landscape
    - Purpose:
      - When dealing with certain problems, the landscape may be deceptive to an organisms exploration.
      - How does a selection scheme contend with this challenge.
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values).
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - Given K and X beforehand, can organisms' reach X for all K internal values
      - Fitness(org, X, vi) = tens place - ones place
      - Ex, Fitness(org, X, vi) -> vi = 78 -> 70 - 8 = 62 = Fitness(org, X, vi) = 62
      - If an organism's internal value goes over 100, will do the same process as above
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a deceptive landscape affect solutions attempting to reach objective
      - Solution count
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree
      - Exploitation + sawtooth effect

  - Overfitting diagnostic - Noise
    - Purpose:
      - When dealing with data, there may be noise associated with it
      - How does a selection scheme contend with this challenge
    - Literature:
      - Genetic Algorithms, Tournament Selection, and the Effects of Noise
      - Ton of ML literature on this subject
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - Each internal value will have 5 numbers associated with it
      - These 5 values are generated from N(X,sig) or a Normal Distribution
      - When picking a test case to evaluate organisms on, one of the random 5 numbers will be selected as well
    - Analysis:
      - How much does noise affect solutions attempting to reach objective?
      - Solution count
        - All internal values reach X
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Overfitting diagnostic - Smoothness
    - Purpose:
      - Please help...
    - Literature:
      - Ton of ML literature on this subject
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - We will define a function before hand, f(x) = x^2 for example
      - Each internal value has a unique value associated with it
      - [v1=1, v2=2, ..., vk=k]
      - f(v1) = f(1) = 1, f(v2) = f(2) = 4, ..., f(k) = f(k) = k^2
      - fitness(org) = sum(f(vi) - g(vi)), for all internal values where f is the ground truth and g is the solution's response
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a multiobjective problem affect solutions attempting to reach objective.
      - Solution count
        - All internal values must match the ground truth
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree

  - Exploration diagnostic
    - Only the highest trait counts & sequentially from there, going forward any traits that are lower than it
    - Purpose:
      - If there are many good places to go from here, can I find the right path?
    - Literature:
      - STILL LOOKING ._.
    - ORG Structure:
      - K internal values (vector of k values)
        - [v1, v2, ..., vk]
      - Mutations can increase or decrease a specific k value
      - No instructions required, since org is essentially a bit string
    - Problem:
      - fitness(org, K, X) = |X - vi| + ... + |X - vk|
        - vi is the internal value that minimizes |X - v|
      - We then sum all internal values to the right
    - Analysis:
      - How much does a problem structure affect solutions attempting to reach objective.
      - Solution count
      - Phenotypic diversity
      - Phylogenetic tree
    - Expectation:
      - Age based selection schemes do well here

  - Pareto front diagnostic **MAYBE**
    - explicit trade-offs
    - overall target, every time there's a mutation => equal and opposite mutation on another trait
    - how many combinations can the selection scheme look at?
    - lots possible!
